+++
title = "day 1"
date = 2025-08-19
+++

## syllabus

goes by Indra. 

Office: R2 073, Norton Hall. Office Hours: Tue 9:00–10:30 AM, Wed 3:00–5:00 PM

CANCEL ALEKS PLEASE. NOT USED IN CLASS. ITS NOT TOO LATE FOR A REFUND.

DONT NEED TO BUY THE TEXTBOOK.

# introduction

### Statistics
the science of collecting, organizing, analyzing, and interpreting data to draw meaningful conclusions.

### Probability
the mathematical study of uncertainty.

### Descriptive Statistics
* summarizes/displays data
* helps visualize big data
* useful for understanding patterns

### Inferential Statistics
* uses data from a sample to make predictions
* helps to make informed decisions

### Population
* the **entire group**.
* can be large or small
* if the population is small, we can conduct a census

### Sample
* represents a subset of the population
* often suffers from bias

### Parameter
* measure obtained from the whole group
* often hard to find

### Statistic
* measure obtained from the sample
* may not be accurate

### Symbols
|Measure|Parameter|Statistic|
|-:|:-:|:-:|
|Mean| {% math() %} \(\mu\) {% end %} | {% math() %} \(\bar{x}\) {% end %} |
|Standard Deviation|{% math() %}\(\sigma\){% end %}|{% math() %}\(s\){% end %}|
|Proportion|{% math() %}\(p\){% end %}|{% math() %}\(\hat{p}\){% end %}|
## Sampling Methods
### Census
* whole population
### Simple Random Sample (SRS)
* a randomly chosen subset without duplicates
### Sample of Convenience
* selection is based on convenience
* often biased
* easy to perform
### Stratified Sampling
* population divided into subgroups (**strata**) based on characteristic
* SRS taken from each stratum
### Cluster Sampling
* population divided into subgroups (**clusters**) usually based on location
* randomly select entire clusters
### Systematic Sampling
* select every *k*th element
### Voluntary Response Sampling
* individuals choose whether to respond
* creates bias towards extreme opinions





made with
{% latex() %}
\(\KaTeX\)
{% end %}
